Original email: 

Suppose I wanted a backend that would export the Cerberus semantic model of a given C program to Lean. Are there any options for doing that? How hard would it be to build it? 

I want something like the following for a given input C program: 

* Run Cerberus on the program, resulting in a model of the semantics 
* Compile the Cerberus model into definitions written in Lean (eg. a set of Lean functions) 
* State (but don't prove) the theorem that this program is UB-free, also in Lean 

(Then we would use filling in the theorem as a challenge problem for other stuff) 

Some vague ideas: we could write a Lean AST for Core, and then define a semantic function implementing the Core semantics. But this seems like it would duplicate work that you've already done defining the semantics.
Perhaps there’s a way to get hold of that semantics by writing a Lean backend for Lem? I'm sure there's a cleverer way. 


Opinion from Cerberus designer: 

[+Jean]

Hi Mike,

Kayvan will know better, but off the top of my head:

On Sat, 8 Nov 2025 at 21:39, Mike Dodds <miked@galois.com> wrote:
Hi Peter, Kayvan, 

> Suppose I wanted a backend that would export the Cerberus semantic model of a given C program to Lean. Are there any options for doing that? How hard would it be to build it? 

> I want something like the following for a given input C program: 

> * Run Cerberus on the program, resulting in a model of the semantics 

Running existing Cerberus front-end + elaboration to produce Core is straightforward.  (Depending on the C you want to support - it's covers a lot, but there are always more GCC/Clang extensions and bits of standard library and dark corners). Much of the complexity is in this part, which one could leave as-is.
 
> * Compile the Cerberus model into definitions written in Lean (eg. a set of Lean functions) 

The Core dynamic semantics is a executable small-step operational semantics, linked with the memory object model.   I think that's partly in (pure) OCaml and partly in Lem, and it's some thousands of lines but not enormous (the memory model is 3k raw LoC, but that includes several variants; I think the main core opsem is 1.5k, but I don't know what it depends on).  I think the Core AST is an Ott definition - it'd probably be easy to make a Lean backend for Ott (certainly if just targetting the AST part).

Kayvan+Jean have thought a bit about moving the dynamic semantics into Rocq; I'm not sure how far that's got.

I imagine a one-off port into Lean would be tedious but rather straightforward.

For the Lem parts, it might be that making a (possibly quite shonky) Lean backend would be cost-effective, just to get most of the syntax changes even if it didn't always generate good Lean, and could be done by analogy with the other backends.  We've not been developing Lem for a while, though.
And for the OCaml parts, maybe one could crudely hack coq-of-ocaml???
Or just manually translate and hand-edit, with sed scripts...
